GWC curriculum JOSE paper (#5)
GWC-DCMB/curriculum-notebooks: paper/paper.md

collaborative development and peer review using pull requests.
In the initial curriculum drafting phase, developers were assigned lesson and
practice notebooks to write.
Once the draft of a lesson was completed, the writer opened a pull request and
asked for review from a different developer.
The reviewer then provided feedback and approved the pull request to be merged
into the main branch after the writer made any requested changes.
This way, more than one person viewed each notebook before it could be
incorporated into the public curriculum, which reduced mistakes and ensured
higher quality content. <!-- TODO: cite U-M Carpentries paper for the development model once it's submitted to bioRxiv?-->
While teaching from the curriculum at the first Data Science Summer Experience,
instructors took notes on their experience and fixed any problems afterward.
Maintainers continue to monitor the repository and resolve issues as they arise.

TODO: recording videos for virtual flipped classroom

# Curriculum

## Learning Objectives

## Course Content

## Instructional Design
<!-- teaching philosophy / pedagogy -->

## Experience of Use

> We have used this curriculum to teach Summer Experince and Club in person in 2019 and virtually in 2020.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We have used this curriculum to teach the Data Science Summer Experience and Girls Who Code Club in person in 2019 and virtually in 2020-2021.
```

For the in person instances, we taught the curriculum through live coding, a tenchique we learned from [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org/) where the instructor types and explains the code while the learners follow along in real time.
For the virtual instances, we used a flipped classroom approach where the learners watch videos of instructors explaining the material through "live" coding and follow along. 
For both in person and virtual instances, we had several facilitators present at each session to answer questions and help learners debug. 
Furthermore, one or two facilitators were assigned to each project group to help learners define data analysis questions, develop and execute a data analysis plan, visualize and communicate their findings, and troubleshoot coding problems. 

We credit the success of our curriculum not only to the skill of the instructors, but also to the way we organized and executed the lessons and project:
1. The instructors and learners all used Google co-lab to write and execute code in Jupyter notebooks.

> We chose this option because learners do not have to install any programs to use Google co-lab and you can easily open and edit the Jupyter notebooks from GitHub.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We chose this option because learners do not have to install any programs to use Google co-lab and you can easily open and edit the Jupyter notebooks from GitHub.  When meeting in person, most learners use Google Chromebooks which have limited programming capabilities, but easy use of a web browser.
```

While teaching from the curriculum at the first Data Science Summer Experience,
instructors took notes on their experience and fixed any problems afterward.
Maintainers continue to monitor the repository and resolve issues as they arise.

Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we quickly pivoted our club to a
virtual format.
In preparation for the 2020 Summer Experience, we switched to a flipped
classroom style following feedback from our club participants that it was too
difficult to follow along live coding via Zoom.
We recorded facilitators teaching the lesson notebooks as if they were live
coding, then shared them along with a link to the lesson notebooks for students
to code along with while watching the videos.
Each video shows the Jupyter notebook alongside the facilitator themselves
teaching.
This format allowed students to learn at their own pace, then ask questions and
practice when we met together virtually. <!-- TODO: should this actually go later in the curriculum section?-->

Our Jupyter notebooks and links to the lesson videos can be accessed on GitHub:
https://github.com/GWC-DCMB/curriculum-notebooks

# Curriculum

> Our curriculum was designed for high school students with no prior coding experience who are interested in learning Python programming for data science, however this course material would be useful for anyone interested in learning basic programming for data analysis, regardless of age or experience level. 

Reviewer 2: resolved with commit a1455182ee2f5cd609a420bd5890ed0e7c8cee39

> Our curriculum features short lessons to deliver course material in “bite sized” chunks, followed by practices to solidify the learners understanding. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our curriculum features short lessons to deliver course material in “bite sized” chunks, followed by practices to solidify the learners' understanding. 
```

Reviewer 2: resolved with commit a1455182ee2f5cd609a420bd5890ed0e7c8cee39

## Learning Objectives

Our learning objectives are:

1. Understand fundamental concepts and best practices in coding
2. Appy data analysis to real world data to answer scientific questions
3. Create informative summaries and visualizations of data in Python

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and participation in our programming exposes students to the many ways coding and data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

> Our curriculum design consists of 27 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup, Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including Pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses and plotting using seaborn and matplotlib. Each of the following modules consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Our curriculum design consists of 27 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup, Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including Pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses and plotting using seaborn and matplotlib (Figure 1). Each of the following modules consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson:
```

---
title: 'Teaching Python for Data Science: Collaborative development of a modular & interactive curriculum'
tags:
  - Data Science
  - Python
  - Jupyter
  - Girls Who Code
authors:
  - name: Marlena Duda
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Negar Farzaneh
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Vy Nguyen
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Sarah Haynes

>     orcid: TODO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    orcid: 0000-0003-3225-1691
```

>     affiliation: TODO

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    affiliation: 6
```

  - name: Hayley Falk

>     orcid: TODO

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
    orcid: 0000-0002-5198-1836
```

    affiliation: "5, 1"
  - name: Rucheng Diao
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Morgan Oneka
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Audrey Drotos
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Alana Woloshin
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Gabrielle Dotson
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: April Kriebel
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Lucy Meng
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Stephanie Thiede
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Shweta Ramdas
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Zena Lapp^[corresponding author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-4674-2176
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Brooke N. Wolford^[corresponding author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-3153-1552
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan
    index: 1
  - name: Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan
    index: 2
  - name: Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan
    index: 3
  - name: Michigan Neuroscience Institute, Univerity of Michigan
    index: 4
  - name: Biophysics Graduate Program, Univerity of Michigan

>     index: 5

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    index: 5
 -  name: Department of Pathology, University of Michigan
    index: 6
```

they were learning into context and think about how they might use the skills
they were learning in potential future careers.

### Learner experiences

We surveyed learners anonymously after each Club and Summer Experience and found
that they all felt like they had improved their skills in Python programming,
problem solving and critical thinking, and collaboration.
Furthermore, for the 2019 instance of Club we asked that all participants take a
pre-test and a post-test.
While only five participants recorded their post-test, all of them answered more
questions correctly on the post-test than the pre-test (range 1-8 more questions
correct out of 11).

Overwhelmingly, learners' favorite parts are the guest speakers and the project.
These aspects of our curriculum expose learners to new fields and allow them to
apply their newfound coding skills to asking an interesting question.
About a third of participants claim that they are now more interested in
pursuing a career in computer or data science.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge our faculty co-sponsors Maureen Sartor, PhD &
Cristina Mitrea, PhD.

> We appreciate the continued support of U-M DCMB staff including Julia Eussen,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
We appreciate the continued support of U-M DCMB including Brian Athey, PhD, Margit Burmeister, PhD, Julia Eussen,
```

---
title: 'Teaching Python for Data Science: Collaborative development of a modular & interactive curriculum'
tags:
  - Data Science
  - Python
  - Jupyter
  - Girls Who Code
authors:
  - name: Marlena Duda
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Negar Farzaneh
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Vy Nguyen

>     orcid: TODO

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    orcid: 0000-0002-6128-0523
```

Reviewer 5: Updated ORCID ID

>     affiliation: 1

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
    affiliation: 1, 8
```

Reviewer 5: Add index for affiliation of Environmental Health Sciences.

  - name: Sarah Haynes
    orcid: 0000-0003-3225-1691
    affiliation: 6
  - name: Hayley Falk
    orcid: 0000-0002-5198-1836
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Katherine L. Furman
    orcid: 0000-0002-0340-4292
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Logan A. Walker
    orcid: 0000-0002-5378-3315
    affiliation: "5, 1"
  - name: Rucheng Diao
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Morgan Oneka
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Audrey Drotos
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Alana Woloshin
    orcid: 0000-0002-5224-4221
    affiliation: 7
  - name: Gabrielle Dotson
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: April Kriebel
    orcid: 0000-0003-0008-9044
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Lucy Meng
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Stephanie N. Thiede
    orcid: 0000-0003-0173-4324
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Shweta Ramdas
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Zena Lapp^[corresponding author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-4674-2176
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Brooke N. Wolford^[corresponding author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-3153-1552
    affiliation: 1

> affiliations:

Reviewer 5: Could you add my affiliations from EHS? Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of Michigan

  - name: Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan
    index: 1
  - name: Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan
    index: 2
  - name: Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan
    index: 3
  - name: Michigan Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan
    index: 4
  - name: Biophysics Graduate Program, University of Michigan
    index: 5
  - name: Department of Pathology, University of Michigan
    index: 6
  - name: School of Information, University of Michigan
    index: 7
date: 30 Apr. 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

<!-- pasted from our PyCon 2020 talk proposal -->

> We are Bioinformatics PhD students at the University of Michigan who started a

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
We, Bioinformatics PhD students at the University of Michigan, started a
```

Reviewer 5: Added commas. The "who" was attached to University of Michigan, so it read like University of Michigan started a local chapter instead of us.

local chapter of Girls Who Code to provide a fun and supportive environment for
high school women to learn the power of coding.
Our goal was to cover basic coding topics and data science concepts through
live-coding and hands-on practice.

> However, we couldn’t find a resource that exactly met our needs. Over the past

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
However, we couldn’t find a resource that exactly met our needs. Therefore, over the past
```

Reviewer 5: Add transition word.

> three years, we have developed a curriculum and instructional format using

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
three years, we have developed a curriculum and instructional format by using
```

Reviewer 5: Add preposition.

Jupyter notebooks to effectively teach introductory Python for data science.
This method, inspired by The Carpentries organization, uses bite-sized lessons
followed by independent practice time to reinforce coding concepts, and
culminates in a data science capstone project using real-world data.
We believe our open curriculum is a valuable resource to the wider education
community and hope that educators will use and improve our lessons, challenge
problems, and teaching best-practices.
Anyone can contribute to [our educational materials on GitHub](https://github.com/GWC-DCMB).

# Statement of Need

As women in the Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics at the

> University of Michigan, we experience the gender gap in our field first hand.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
University of Michigan, we experience the gender gap first hand in our field.
```

Reviewer 5: Switched phrases. This sound more readable to me, but feel free to reject!

During the 1974-1975 academic year, women achieved 18.9% of total Bachelor's
degrees in computer and information sciences in the US [@nces_digest_2012].

> By 1983-1984 this peaked at 37.1%, but fell to 17.6% by 2010-2011. We see this

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
By 1983-1984 this peaked at 37.1%, but fell to 17.6% by 2010-2011. We also see this
```

Reviewer 5: Added "also" to help connect to previous sentence.

national trend in the training of the next generation of Bioinformaticians at
Michigan Medicine.
Since accepting its first students in 2001, the U-M Bioinformatics Graduate
Program has graduated 66 male and 22 female doctorates as of 2019.
This disparity begins at the applicant level — during 2016-2019 the average
percentage of females applying directly to the Bioinformatics PhD program is
35.2%, and 41% for female applicants listing Bioinformatics as first or second

> choice in the biomedical PhD umbrella program PIBS.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
choice in the biomedical PhD umbrella program PIBS (Program in Biomedical Sciences).
```

Reviewer 5: Spell at abbreviations for the first appearance

various explanations for persistent gender disparities
[@benbow_gender_2016].
One explanation is that women in first year computer science courses rate
themselves as being less experienced, prepared, or able to master the course
material than the men [@fisher_undergraduate_1997].
The majority of our organization's founding graduate students (all women) began
coding in our undergraduate careers or later.
We wanted to provide a safe place for local young women to begin coding in high
school, and develop confidence in themselves and their computational skills
before college.
A national organization, Girls Who Code, whose mission and values aligned with
ours, was founded in 2012.
Girls Who Code's mission is to close the gender gap in technology
[@saujani_girls_2015].
Because of our personal experiences and the paucity of women in our field, we
began a student organization at the University of Michigan in 2017.
For the past four academic years we have registered annually as a recognized
Girls Who Code Club because the national organization provided name recognition,
curriculum resources, guidance for a Capstone Impact Project, and a framework
for launching a coding club.

> In 2019 we launched a Data Science Summer Experience which is unaffiliated with

Reviewer 5: Could we list a reason on why we launch Summer Experience? What gap were we trying to fill?

Reviewer 2: Help wanted! Anyone want to try to address this? The gist is something like: most of our club participants are from A2 & surrounding schools which have lots of resources, meanwhile we're nearby Detroit which has fewer resources.

Author: Done

the national Girls Who Code organization.

The national Girls Who Code organization provides a curriculum that teaches
website and application development through programming languages like HTML and
Java.
However, our biomedical science graduate students generally have limited
experience with these languages.
Data Scientist was rated the #1 job in America by Glassdoor in 2016-2019, #3 in
2020, and #2 in 2021 [@stansell_breaking_2019].
We believe career exploration in data science will optimally prepare our
students for careers that provide financial stability. <!-- TODO: address comment from AK: "Do we need to establish a clearer link between data science and the use of Python specifically? The PYPL index, used as a proxy for how popular a language is, has ranked Python as it's number one language (https://pypl.github.io/PYPL.html). I'm not sure if this the best way to illustrate the point, but I do think we need more support for the place of Python in the workplace." -->
By leveraging the data science expertise of our Club facilitators, we created a
specialized curriculum focused on computational data science in the Python
programming language.

> Girls Who Code encourages participants to learn programming skills while working

Reviewer 5: Are we referring to national GWC or DCMB GWC in this sentence?

Reviewer 2: National. We usually say "GWC at UM DCMB" or "our club" when referring to us.

on an Impact Project website or application throughout the Club
[@hq_gallery_2021].
We created an open source Data Science curriculum that teaches the requisite
Python and statistics skills to complete a Capstone Project, which is a data
analysis project on a data set of interest.
Using this curriculum, we employ participatory live coding as used by The

> Carpentries, which is an effective method that engages learners

Reviewer 5: Specify how this method engages learners?

Reviewer 2: I think the citations are enough

---
title: 'Teaching Python for Data Science: Collaborative development of a modular & interactive curriculum'
tags:
  - Data Science
  - Python
  - Jupyter
  - Girls Who Code
authors:
  - name: Marlena Duda
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Negar Farzaneh
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1

>   - name: Vy Nguyen

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
  - name: Vy Kim Nguyen
```

Reviewer 5: Added my middle name, because there are many Vy Nguyens

    affiliation: 1
  - name: Lucy Meng
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Stephanie N. Thiede
    orcid: 0000-0003-0173-4324
    affiliation: 2
  - name: Shweta Ramdas
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: TODO
  - name: Zena Lapp^[corresponding author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-4674-2176
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Brooke N. Wolford^[corresponding author]
    orcid: 0000-0003-3153-1552
    affiliation: 1
affiliations:
  - name: Department of Computational Medicine & Bioinformatics, University of Michigan
    index: 1
  - name: Department of Microbiology & Immunology, University of Michigan
    index: 2
  - name: Neuroscience Graduate Program, University of Michigan
    index: 3
  - name: Michigan Neuroscience Institute, University of Michigan
    index: 4
  - name: Biophysics Graduate Program, University of Michigan
    index: 5
  - name: Department of Pathology, University of Michigan
    index: 6
  - name: School of Information, University of Michigan
    index: 7
  - name: Department of Environmental Health Sciences, University of Michigan
    index: 8
date: 30 Apr. 2021
bibliography: paper.bib
---

# Summary

<!-- pasted from our PyCon 2020 talk proposal -->

> We are Bioinformatics PhD students at the University of Michigan who started a

Reviewer 2: Should we still say this even though we're not all PhD students and not all in Bioinf? Although most of us are, including the first & corresponding authors.

University of Michigan, we experience the gender gap first hand in our field.
During the 1974-1975 academic year, women achieved 18.9% of total Bachelor's
degrees in computer and information sciences in the US [@nces_digest_2012].
By 1983-1984 this peaked at 37.1%, but fell to 17.6% by 2010-2011. We also see this
national trend in the training of the next generation of Bioinformaticians at
Michigan Medicine.
Since accepting its first students in 2001, the U-M Bioinformatics Graduate
Program has graduated 66 male and 22 female doctorates as of 2019.
This disparity begins at the applicant level — during 2016-2019 the average
percentage of females applying directly to the Bioinformatics PhD program is
35.2%, and 41% for female applicants listing Bioinformatics as first or second
choice in the biomedical PhD umbrella program PIBS.

Previous research on women's educational experiences in STEM have produced
various explanations for persistent gender disparities
[@benbow_gender_2016].
One explanation is that women in first year computer science courses rate
themselves as being less experienced, prepared, or able to master the course
material than the men [@fisher_undergraduate_1997].

> The majority of our organization's founding graduate students (all women) began

Reviewer 5: Should we talk about how another explanation could be due to the effects of negative stereotypes (e.g.  girls are not as good as boys in math, and scientific work is better suited to boys and men)? https://www.aauw.org/app/uploads/2020/03/why-so-few-research.pdf (pg 54-59). We want to expose young women to successful female role models to help counter such stereotypes and help them see that they can be successful too.

Reviewer 2: Help wanted! Anyone want to try to address this?

Author: Done

1. Each short lesson is also accompanied by a subsequent 10-minute independent practice, providing further opportunity for practical experience implementing the coding skill at hand and testing their understanding of the content.

This curriculum was originally developed for in-person instruction, but the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic necessitated restructuring to a virtual format.
To better facilitate virtual instruction, we switched to a flipped classroom style based on feedback from our club participants that it was too difficult to follow along with live coding via Zoom.
We provide video recordings of instructors going through the Jupyter notebooks as if they were live coding in the classroom.
Students then watch the lessons and complete the practice exercises prior to virtual meetings, in which they have the opportunity to ask questions on material they did not understand and go over the practice exercises.
This virtual format is especially beneficial because it 1) allows students to learn at their own pace, and 2) enables dissemination of our curriculum to a wider audience interested in learning introductory Python programming for data science.

> For both in-person and virtual instruction, once students have completed the Fundamentals module and reach the Data Science Essentials module they will begin simultaneous work on their data science projects.

Reviewer 5: List the lessons for the Fundamentals module vs. Data Science Essentials module?

Reviewer 2: @zenalapp @marlenad this is the first time I've seen these terms. If we want to use them, we should signify which lessons are part of which module and update the README. Otherwise, we could say something like this:

```suggestion
For both in-person and virtual instruction, once students have completed the lessons covering programming fundamentals (#1-13) and reach the lessons on introductory data science (#14 onward), they begin simultaneous work on their data science projects.
```

Author: Added modules to the lessons list. Haven't done anything in the actual repo, but not sure it's necessary as long as it's in the paper.

Projects are completed in a paired programming style, where partners take turns assuming the “driver” (i.e. the typer) and “navigator” (i.e. the instructor) roles.
Switching off in this way helps both partners assume equal responsibility for the project workload, but more importantly it enables improved knowledge transfer through peer-to-peer learning.

> In addition to our coding curriculum, another key component of our programming is hosting guest speakers from diverse fields across academia and industry.

Reviewer 5: Should we provide some statistics to justify the diversity of our guest speakers?

Reviewer 2: We didn't always collect that info, and I think we don't strictly need to justify the statement. JOSE papers are supposed to be relatively short.

organization.

Our programming is made possible by the dedication of past and present Executive
Committee members, Club and Summer Experience Facilitators & Capstone Project
mentors including Alex Weber, Arushi Varshney, Sophie Hoffman, Hojae Lee,
Ruma Deb, Saige Rutherford, Michelle McNulty, Bailey Peck, Chloe Whicker,
Carolina Rojas Ramirez, Verity Sturm, Zoe Drasner, Sarah Latto, Emily
Roberts, Angel Chu, Vivek Rai, Hillary Miller, Ashton Baker, Murchtricia
Charles, Lauren Jepsen, and Aubrey Annis.
TODO: add 2019, 2020, & 2021 facilitators not already listed.

Our student organization received funding from the U-M Office of Graduate and
Postdoctoral Studies, Girls Who Code Support Fund, Department of Computational
Medicine and Bioinformatics, anonymous donations from Giving Blue Day 2019,
Endowment in Basic Sciences.
The 2019 Summer Experience was sponsored by Zingerman’s Delicatessen, U-M
Statistics Department, U-M Detroit Center, Dell, Cisco, U-M Department of
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, U-M Biostatistics Department.
We also thank the students who have participated in our Club and Summer
Experience events.

# Funding

> MD and KLS received support from the NIH Training Program in Bioinformatics (T32

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
MD, VKN, and KLS received support from the NIH Training Program in Bioinformatics (T32
```

Reviewer 5: Added my funding

GM070449).
MD, ZL, and BNW received support from the National Science Foundation Graduate
Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE 1256260.
ZL and BNW received support from the NIH Training Program in Genomic Science
(T32-HG000040-22).
KLF received support from The University of Michigan NIDA Training Program in
Neuroscience (T32-DA7281) and from the NIH Early Stage Training in the
Neurosciences Training Grant (T32-NS076401).
SNT was supported by the Molecular Mechanisms of Microbial Pathogenesis training
grant (NIH T32 AI007528).

> 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
VKN was supported by a NIH Research Project Grant on Breast Cancer Disparities (RO1-ES028802) and the CDC through the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) Pilot Project Research Training Program (T42-OH008455). 
```

This curriculum was originally developed for in-person instruction, but the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic necessitated restructuring to a virtual format.
To better facilitate virtual instruction, we switched to a flipped classroom style based on feedback from our club participants that it was too difficult to follow along with live coding via Zoom.
We provide video recordings of instructors going through the Jupyter notebooks as if they were live coding in the classroom.
Students then watch the lessons and complete the practice exercises prior to virtual meetings, in which they have the opportunity to ask questions on material they did not understand and go over the practice exercises.
This virtual format is especially beneficial because it 1) allows students to learn at their own pace, and 2) enables dissemination of our curriculum to a wider audience interested in learning introductory Python programming for data science.

For both in-person and virtual instruction, once students have completed the Fundamentals module and reach the Data Science Essentials module they will begin simultaneous work on their data science projects.

> Projects are completed in a paired programming style, where partners take turns assuming the “driver” (i.e. the typer) and “navigator” (i.e. the instructor) roles.

Reviewer 6: I think an additional sentence or two more clearly elaborating on how paired programming works (something like "The navigator proposes a solution to the problem while the driver physically types the solution") might be useful, just to further clarify the two roles for those who aren't familiar with paired programming

Reviewer 2: Could also/instead cite a blog post or paper that describes it in more detail.

teaching.
This format allowed students to learn at their own pace, then ask questions and
practice when we met together virtually. <!-- TODO: should this actually go later in the curriculum section?-->

Our Jupyter notebooks and links to the lesson videos can be accessed on GitHub:
https://github.com/GWC-DCMB/curriculum-notebooks

# Curriculum

Our curriculum was designed for high school students with no prior coding
experience who are interested in learning Python programming for data science.
However, this course material would be useful for anyone interested in learning
basic programming for data analysis, regardless of age or experience level.

Our curriculum features short lessons to deliver course material in “bite sized”
chunks, followed by practices to solidify the learners' understanding.

## Learning Objectives

Our learning objectives are:

1. Understand fundamental concepts and best practices in coding.
2. Apply data analysis to real world data to answer scientific questions.
3. Create informative summary statistics and data visualizations in Python.

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and

> participation in our programming exposes students to the many ways coding and

Author: It seems kind of weird to use this word in the context when most of the time we're actually talking about coding, but I can't think of a better word. Any suggestions?

Author: yean

> participation in our programming exposes students to the many ways coding and

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
participation in our events exposes students to the many ways coding and
```

data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

Our curriculum design consists of 27 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including
Pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and

> matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;

Author: Are we going to include a figure? @marlenad did you ever get around to drafting one? I can also draft one and/or we can just not have a figure.

Reviewer 7: How is this?
![curriculum_fig](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/22454290/119025986-aaecfb80-b972-11eb-8fd6-1e956e7a0bc2.png)

Author: Looks great!

Reviewer 2: super super minor critique: could we pick different colors that aren't the Microsoft default? Or maybe make all the boxes the same color? Could pick a hex value from one of our logos.

Reviewer 7: lol ya sure, let me make up a prototype

Reviewer 7: ![curriculum_fig2](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/22454290/119037113-8f3c2200-b97f-11eb-9fbe-4acb665d054c.png)
this uses the teal colors from the GWC design guide https://girlswhocode.com/assets/downloads/GWC_DesignGuide_Short_z3-2.pdf

Reviewer 2: looks great, thanks @marlenad!

@hunter_matplotlib_2007].
Each of the following modules consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson:

1. Jupyter Setup
2. HelloWorld and Variables
3. Variables and Types
4. Lists Intro
5. Indexing

> 6. 2D Lists Intro

Author: Didn't we decide to nix 2D lists?

Reviewer 2: we still have the notebook content, we just don't use it in SE. I think we skipped it in club too. maybe let's keep it there since the content exists and it will mess up all the numbering to remove it.

Author: Maybe we should somehow indicate that we don't use it? (e.g. say "legacy lesson" in parentheses or something like that.) So if people actually want to use this as a curriculum they know that we no longer use it?

Author: Or both

Author: I changed it here but not in the actual lesson README

1. We exposed the learners to different aspects of data science by bringing in
guest speakers from academics and industry. This allowed them to better put what
they were learning into context and think about how they might use the skills
they were learning in potential future careers.

### Learner experiences

We surveyed learners anonymously after each Club and Summer Experience and found
that they all felt like they had improved their skills in Python programming,
problem solving and critical thinking, and collaboration.
Furthermore, for the 2019 instance of Club we asked that all participants take a
pre-test and a post-test.
While only five participants recorded their post-test, all of them answered more
questions correctly on the post-test than the pre-test (range 1-8 more questions
correct out of 11).

Overwhelmingly, learners' favorite parts are the guest speakers and the project.
These aspects of our curriculum expose learners to new fields and allow them to
apply their newfound coding skills to asking an interesting question.
About a third of participants claim that they are now more interested in
pursuing a career in computer or data science.

> # Acknowledgements

Reviewer 2: Nope, I'm working on assembling all the contact info.

> # Acknowledgements

Reviewer 2: We have permission from GWC now. I'm working on contacting facilitators plus the other organizations & sponsors. Can someone (@zenalapp @marlenad @bnwolford) contact the DCMB staff & faculty that we list by name?

## Learning Objectives

Our learning objectives are:

1. Understand fundamental concepts and best practices in coding.
2. Apply data analysis to real world data to answer scientific questions.
3. Create informative summary statistics and data visualizations in Python.

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and
participation in our events exposes students to the many ways coding and
data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

Our curriculum design consists of 27 lessons broken up into 5 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including
Pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and
matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;
@hunter_matplotlib_2007].
Each of the following modules consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson:

Jupyter Notebook Setup:
1. Jupyter Setup

> Coding Fundamentals:

Author: Oh no I messed up the number formatting. If anyone knows an easy fix, please help. Otherwise I'll look into it later.

Reviewer 2: Did you though? It looks like someone typed in the raw numbers rather than using markdown's automatic numbering, so they look correct.

Reviewer 2: Oh I see the problem. Needed a newline between the previous "paragraph" (actually the sublist title) and the start of the list.

---
title: 'Teaching Python for Data Science: Collaborative development of a modular & interactive curriculum'
tags:
  - Data Science
  - Python
  - Jupyter
  - Girls Who Code
authors:
  - name: Marlena Duda
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Negar Farzaneh
    orcid: TODO
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Vy Kim Nguyen
    orcid: 0000-0002-6128-0523
    affiliation: "1, 8"
  - name: Sarah Haynes
    orcid: 0000-0003-3225-1691
    affiliation: 6
  - name: Hayley Falk
    orcid: 0000-0002-5198-1836
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Katherine L. Furman
    orcid: 0000-0002-0340-4292
    affiliation: "3, 4"
  - name: Logan A. Walker
    orcid: 0000-0002-5378-3315
    affiliation: "5, 1"
  - name: Rucheng Diao

>     orcid: TODO

Reviewer 8: 0000-0002-2932-6755

>     orcid: TODO

Reviewer 8: 0000-0002-2932-6755

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and
participation in our events exposes students to the many ways coding and
data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

Our curriculum design consists of 27 lessons broken up into 5 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including
Pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and
matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;
@hunter_matplotlib_2007].
Each of the following modules consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson:

Jupyter Notebook Setup:

1. Jupyter Setup

Coding Fundamentals:

2. HelloWorld and Variables
3. Variables and Types
4. Lists Intro
5. Indexing
6. 2D Lists Intro
7. 2D Lists Indexing
8. Logic
9. Conditionals
10. Loops I
11. Loops II
12. Functions and Methods

Data Science Essentials:

13. Packages
14. Pandas-Intro
15. Pandas-Reading
16. Pandas Subsetting I

> 17. Pandas Subsetting II

Reviewer 7: We should standardize the naming conventions for our lessons, i.e. 'Pandas-Intro' vs. 'Lists Intro' vs. 'Pandas Subsetting I'

Author: Done in README as well. Actual files names haven't changed though.

18. Dictionaries

> 19. Functions

Author: I think this is the order we teach them in...

I think the first one for functions is learning how to use them and the second is learning how to write them. We can clarify

20. Numpy Intro

Basic Statistical Analysis:

21. Basic Stats I - Averages
22. Basic Stats II - Percents
23. Basic Stats III - Correlations
24. Basic Stats IV - Significance

Plotting:

25. Plotting I - Line Graphs
26. Plotting II - Scatterplots

> 27. Plotting III - Bar Charts and Histograms

Reviewer 7: Again with standardizing naming conventions - none of the previous modules are included in lesson names, maybe we ditch the 'Basic Stats I -' and 'Plotting II -' prefixes in these last two modules. We should also make sure all the lessons in the gitthub repo match. Lastly, I think the module should be named Data Visualization instead of Plotting (I implemented this in the suggested figure above)

Author: Done

---
title: 'Teaching Python for Data Science: Collaborative development of a modular & interactive curriculum'
tags:
  - Data Science
  - Python
  - Jupyter
  - Girls Who Code
authors:
  - name: Marlena Duda
    orcid: 0000-0003-2369-2225
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Kelly L. Sovacool
    orcid: 0000-0003-3283-829X
    affiliation: 1
  - name: Negar Farzaneh

>     orcid: TODO

Reviewer 9: 0000-0003-1200-5274

    affiliation: 1
  - name: Vy Kim Nguyen
    orcid: 0000-0002-6128-0523
    affiliation: "1, 8"

>   - name: Sarah Haynes

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
  - name: Sarah E. Haynes
```

Michigan Medicine.
Since accepting its first students in 2001, the U-M Bioinformatics Graduate
Program has graduated 66 male and 22 female doctorates as of 2019.
This disparity begins at the applicant level; during 2016-2019 the average
percentage of females applying directly to the Bioinformatics PhD program was
35.2%, and the average percentage of female applicants listing Bioinformatics as first or second
choice in the Program in Biomedical Sciences, U-M's biomedical PhD umbrella
program was 41%.

Previous research on women's educational experiences in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) have produced
various explanations for persistent gender disparities
[@benbow_gender_2016].
One explanation is that women in first year computer science courses rate
themselves as being less experienced, prepared, or able to master the course
material than the men [@fisher_undergraduate_1997].
Additionally, women often experience stereotype threats that
influence their math and science performance as well as their career goals [@hill_why_2010].
The majority of our organization's founding graduate students (all women) began
coding in our undergraduate careers or later.

> We wanted to provide a safe place for local young high school women to

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We wanted to provide a safe place for local high school women to
```

develop confidence in themselves and their computational skills

> before college, and be exposed to successful female role models in STEM to counter negative

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
before college, and be exposed to successful women role models in STEM to counter negative
```

> before college, and be exposed to successful female role models in STEM to counter negative

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
before college, and be exposed to successful women role models in STEM to counter negative
```

> stereotypes.

Reviewer 3: Would this be a good place to explicitly mention bringing in guest speakers?

Author: I feel like since this is in the intro and we don't talk about our curriculum until later, it doesn't really fit here. We mention it below in Experience of Use (lines 373-379). But maybe we should add a description of a typical day somewhere to the curriculum section?

Author: @hayse1 does that make sense to you? Anywhere else you think we should include it?

Reviewer 3: I think it's fine!

Girls Who Code, a national organization whose mission
is to close the gender gap in technology
[@saujani_girls_2015], was founded in 2012.
Because of our personal experiences and the paucity of women in our field, we
began a Girls Who Code student organization at the University of Michigan in 2017.
For the past four academic years we have registered annually as a recognized
Girls Who Code Club because the national organization provides name recognition,
curriculum resources, guidance for a Capstone Impact Project, and a framework
for launching a coding club.
Participants in the Club attend weekly meetings at the University of Michigan (when
the club is run in-person rather than virtually), and are thus largely high school
women from the Ann Arbor area.
In 2019 we launched a Data Science Summer Experience, which is unaffiliated with
the national Girls Who Code organization. When held in-person, the Summer Experience
is hosted in Detroit to provide the opportunity for high school women from communities with

> fewer resources to attend.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
fewer resources than Ann Arbor to attend.
```

> is hosted in Detroit to provide the opportunity for high school women from communities with
> fewer resources to attend.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
is hosted in Detroit to provide the opportunity to high school women outside of Ann Arbor.
```

Java; however, our biomedical science graduate students generally have limited
experience with these languages and with web development.
In contrast, many of us have extensive experience performing data science
using the Python programming language.
Data Scientist was rated the #1 job in America by Glassdoor in 2016-2019, #3 in
2020, and #2 in 2021 [@stansell_breaking_2019].
Furthermore, Python is the most popular programming language according to the PYPL
PopularitY of Programming Language Index [@noauthor_pypl_nodate].
Therefore, we believe career exploration in data science using the Python programming
language will optimally prepare our students for careers that provide financial stability.
By leveraging the data science expertise of our Club facilitators, we created a
specialized curriculum focused on computational data science in the Python
programming language.

Girls Who Code encourages participants to learn programming skills while working
on an Impact Project website or application throughout the Club
[@hq_gallery_2021].
We created an open source Data Science curriculum that teaches the requisite

> Python and statistics skills to complete a Capstone Project, which is a data
> analysis project on a data set of interest.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Python and statistics skills to complete a Capstone Project, where students explore, 
analyze, and present a data set of their choosing.
```

Using this curriculum, we employ participatory live coding as used by The
Carpentries, which is an effective method that engages learners
[@wilson_software_2016; @nederbragt_ten_2020].
Using paired activities, our curriculum follows the "I do, we do, you do"
didactic paradigm [@fisher_better_2013].
We provide open-source resources for both in-person and virtual versions of our
curriculum, including videos corresponding to each lesson.
While we developed this curriculum for our Girls Who Code Club and Summer
Experience, we believe that it can be widely used for teaching introductory
coding for data science.

# Collaborative Curriculum Development

We assembled a team of volunteers involved in our club to develop a custom
curriculum to teach introductory Python for data science via live coding.
We chose what content to cover based on what our students would need to learn in
order to complete a small data analysis project and communicate their findings
to their peers.

> We divided up the content by topic into Jupyter notebooks for each lesson, with

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We divided the content by topic into Jupyter notebooks for each lesson, with
```

each lesson taking approximately 15-20 minutes to teach via live coding.

> Each lesson has a corresponding practice notebook with additional exercises on

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Every lesson has a corresponding practice notebook with additional exercises on
```

experience who are interested in learning Python programming for data science.
However, this course material would be useful for anyone interested in learning
basic programming for data analysis, regardless of age or experience level.

Our curriculum features short lessons to deliver course material in “bite sized”
chunks, followed by practices to solidify the learners' understanding.

## Learning Objectives

Our learning objectives are:

1. Understand fundamental concepts and best practices in coding.
2. Apply data analysis to real world data to answer scientific questions.
3. Create informative summary statistics and data visualizations in Python.

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and
participation in our events exposes students to the many ways coding and
data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

![Our lesson modules.](lesson-modules.png)

Our curriculum design consists of 27 lessons broken up into 5 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including

> Pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and
```

matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;
@hunter_matplotlib_2007].
Each of the following modules consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson:

Jupyter Notebook Setup:

1. Jupyter Setup

Coding Fundamentals:

2. HelloWorld and Variables
3. Variables and Types
4. Lists Intro
5. Indexing
6. 2D Lists Intro (legacy lesson)
7. 2D Lists Indexing (legacy lesson)
8. Logic
9. Conditionals
10. Loops I
11. Loops II
12. Using Functions and Methods

Data Science Essentials:

13. Packages
14. Pandas Intro
15. Pandas Reading
16. Pandas Subsetting I
17. Pandas Subsetting II
18. Dictionaries
19. Writing Functions
20. Numpy Intro

Basic Statistical Analysis:

21. Averages
22. Percents
23. Correlations
24. Significance

Data Visualization:

25. Line Graphs
26. Scatterplots
27. Bar Charts and Histograms

Each lesson builds on those before it, beginning with relevant content reminders
from the previous lessons and ending with a concise summary of the skills
presented within.

> Throughout our program, the students also simultaneously work on a data science
> project on a topic of interest using a real world dataset of their choosing.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As they progress through the curriculum, the students begin simultaneously working on a data science
project on a topic of their choice using a real world dataset. While more time is dedicated to lessons early
in the program, the formal curriculum tapers off until the students are solely applying their skills to the data science project.  
```

Through this Capstone Project, learners gain practical experience with each
skill as they learn it in the lessons; including importing and cleaning data,
data visualization, and basic statistical analyses.

## Instructional Design
<!-- teaching philosophy / pedagogy -->

We modeled our instructional design in the style of Software Carpentry [@wilson_software_2016].

> 1. Each lesson begins with a recapping of the relevant core skills presented in the previous lessons.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. Each lesson begins with a recap of the relevant core skills presented in the previous lessons.
```

We provide video recordings of instructors going through the Jupyter notebooks as if they were live coding in the classroom.
Students then watch the lessons and complete the practice exercises prior to virtual meetings, in which they have the opportunity to ask questions on material they did not understand and go over the practice exercises.
This virtual format is especially beneficial because it 1) allows students to learn at their own pace, and 2) enables dissemination of our curriculum to a wider audience interested in learning introductory Python programming for data science.

For both in-person and virtual instruction, once students have completed the Fundamentals module and reach the Data Science Essentials module they begin simultaneous work on their data science projects.
Projects are completed in a paired programming style, where partners take turns assuming the “driver” (i.e. the typer) and “navigator” (i.e. the helper) roles [@hannay_effectiveness_2009].
Switching off in this way helps both partners assume equal responsibility for the project workload, but more importantly it enables improved knowledge transfer through peer-to-peer learning.

> In addition to our coding curriculum, another key component of our programming is hosting female guest speakers from diverse fields across academia and industry.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In addition to our coding curriculum, another key component of our programming is hosting women guest speakers from diverse fields across academia and industry.
```

Our guest speakers come to discuss the journey they’ve taken to their career paths as well as how they utilize programming and data science in their jobs.

> These varied perspectives are extremely valuable to our learners as they provide several practical examples of programming careers in the real world, and expose them to successful females in STEM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
These varied perspectives are extremely valuable to our learners as they provide several practical examples of programming careers in the real world, and expose them to successful women in STEM.
```

## Experience of Use

We have used this curriculum to teach the Data Science Summer Experience and
Girls Who Code Club in person in 2019 and virtually in 2020-2021.

> For the in person instances, we taught the curriculum through participatory live

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For the in-person instances, we taught the curriculum through participatory live
```

> We have used this curriculum to teach the Data Science Summer Experience and
> Girls Who Code Club in person in 2019 and virtually in 2020-2021.
> For the in person instances, we taught the curriculum through participatory live
> coding, a technique we learned from [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org/)
> where the instructor types and explains the code while the learners follow along
> in real time.
> For the virtual instances, we used a flipped classroom approach where the
> learners explore the material individually before meeting together.
> Learners watch videos of instructors explaining the material through "live"
> coding and follow along.
> Learners then complete a Practice notebook corresponding to the Lesson.
> Facilitators then spend meeting time answering questions and reviewing the core
> concepts in the Practice notebook.
> For both in person and virtual instances, we had several facilitators present at

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We have used this curriculum to teach the Data Science Summer Experience and
Girls Who Code Club in-person in 2019 and virtually in 2020-2021.
For the in-person instances, we taught the curriculum through participatory live
coding, a technique we learned from [The Carpentries](https://carpentries.org/)
where the instructor types and explains the code while the learners follow along
in real time.
For the virtual instances, we used a flipped classroom approach where the
learners explore the material individually before meeting together.
Learners watch videos of instructors explaining the material through "live"
coding and follow along.
Learners then complete a Practice notebook corresponding to the Lesson.
Facilitators then spend meeting time answering questions and reviewing the core
concepts in the Practice notebook.
For both in-person and virtual instances, we had several facilitators present at
```

each session to answer questions and help learners debug.
Furthermore, one or two facilitators were assigned to each project group to help
learners define data analysis questions, develop and execute a data analysis
plan, visualize and communicate their findings, and troubleshoot coding
problems.

We credit the success of our curriculum not only to the skill of the
instructors, but also to the way we organized and executed the lessons and
project:

1. The instructors and learners used [Google Colaboratory
(Colab)](https://colab.research.google.com/) to write and execute code in
Jupyter notebooks. We chose this option because learners do not have to install
any programs to use Google Colab, and you can easily open and edit the Jupyter

> notebooks from GitHub.  When meeting in person, most learners use Google

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
notebooks from GitHub.  When meeting in-person, most learners use Google
```

Chromebooks which have limited programming capabilities, but easy use of a web
browser.
1. Assigning facilitators to groups allows learners to build a more personal
connection with their facilitators, making them feel more comfortable asking
questions.
1. Group projects were performed using paired programming to allow learners to
collaborate and learn from each other.
1. We use the "sticky note" system from The Carpentries by which learners can
ask for help by putting up a colored sticky note (or a Zoom emoji in the case of
virtual meetings) [@becker_responding_2016].

> 1. We exposed the learners to different aspects of data science by bringing in female

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. We exposed the learners to different aspects of data science by bringing in women
```

guest speakers from academics and industry. This allowed them to better put what
they were learning into context and think about how they might use the skills

> they were learning in potential future careers, and exposed them to successful females in STEM.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
they were learning in potential future careers, and exposed them to successful women in STEM.
```

### Learner experiences

> We surveyed learners anonymously after each Club and Summer Experience and found
> that they all felt like they had improved their skills in Python programming,
> problem solving and critical thinking, and collaboration.
> Furthermore, for the 2019 instance of Club we asked that all participants take a
> pre-test and a post-test.
> While only five participants recorded their post-test, all of them answered more
> questions correctly on the post-test than the pre-test (range 1-8 more questions
> correct out of 11).
> 
> Overwhelmingly, learners' favorite parts are the guest speakers and the project.
> These aspects of our curriculum expose them to new fields and allow them to
> apply their newfound coding skills to asking an interesting question.
> About a third of participants claim that they are now more interested in
> pursuing a career in computer or data science compared to before their Girls Who Code experience.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We surveyed learners anonymously after each Club and Summer Experience and found
that they all felt their skills in Python programming,
problem solving, critical thinking, and collaboration had improved.
Furthermore, for the 2019 instance of Club we asked that all participants take a
pre-test and a post-test comprising Python coding questions.
While only five participants recorded their post-test, all of them answered more
questions correctly on the post-test than the pre-test (range 1-8 more questions
correct out of 11).

Overwhelmingly, learners' favorite parts of the program are the guest speakers and the project.
These aspects of our curriculum expose them to new fields and allow them to
apply their newfound coding skills to asking an interesting question.
About a third of participants claim that they are now more interested in
pursuing a career in computer or data science compared to before their Girls Who Code experience.
```

# Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge our faculty co-sponsors Maureen Sartor &
Cristina Mitrea.
We appreciate the continued support of U-M DCMB staff and faculty including

> Julia Eussen, Mary Freer, Linda Peasley, Jane Weisner, Brian Athey, and

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Julia Eussen, Mary Freer, Linda Peasley, Jane Wiesner, Brian Athey, and
```

> We would like to acknowledge our faculty co-sponsors Maureen Sartor, PhD &
> Cristina Mitrea, PhD.
> We appreciate the continued support of U-M DCMB staff and faculty including
> Julia Eussen, Mary Freer, Linda Peasley, Jane Weisner, Brian Athey, PhD, and
> Margit Burmeister, PhD.
> We are grateful for the resources provided by the national Girls Who Code
> organization.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
We would like to acknowledge our faculty co-sponsors Maureen Sartor &
Cristina Mitrea.
We appreciate the continued support of U-M DCMB staff and faculty including
Julia Eussen, Mary Freer, Linda Peasley, Jane Weisner, Brian Athey, and
Margit Burmeister.
We are grateful for the resources provided by the national Girls Who Code
organization.
```

Our programming is made possible by the dedication of past and present Executive
Committee members, Club and Summer Experience Facilitators, and Capstone Project
mentors including Alex Weber, Arushi Varshney, Sophie Hoffman, Hojae Lee, Ruma

> Deb, Saige Rutherford, Michelle McNulty, Bailey Peck, Chloe Whicker, Carolina

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Deb, Saige Rutherford, Michelle McNulty, Bailey Peck, Chloe Whicker, 
```

> Rojas Ramirez, Verity Sturm, Zoe Drasner, Sarah Latto, Emily Roberts, Angel Chu,

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Verity Sturm, Zoe Drasner, Sarah Latto, Emily Roberts, Angel Chu,
```

Vivek Rai, Hillary Miller, Ashton Baker, Murchtricia Jones, Lauren Jepsen,
Aubrey Annis, Awanti Sambarey, Mengtong Hu, Maribel Okiye, Yingxiao Zhang, and
Neslihan Bisgin.

Our student organization has received funding from the U-M Department of
Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, the U-M Office of Graduate and
Postdoctoral Studies, anonymous donations from Giving Blue Day 2019, the U-M
Endowment in Basic Sciences, and the Girls Who Code Support Fund.
The 2019 Summer Experience was sponsored by Zingerman’s Delicatessen, the U-M
Statistics Department, the U-M Detroit Center, Dell, Cisco, the U-M Department
of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, and the U-M Biostatistics
Department.

We also thank the students who have participated in our Club and Summer
Experience events.

# Funding

MD, ZL, and BNW received support from the National Science Foundation Graduate

> Research Fellowship Program under Grant No. DGE 1256260.

Author: Done

Michigan Medicine.
Since accepting its first students in 2001, the U-M Bioinformatics Graduate
Program has graduated 66 male and 22 female doctorates as of 2019.
This disparity begins at the applicant level; during 2016-2019 the average
percentage of females applying directly to the Bioinformatics PhD program was
35.2%, and the average percentage of female applicants listing Bioinformatics as first or second
choice in the Program in Biomedical Sciences, U-M's biomedical PhD umbrella
program was 41%.

Previous research on women's educational experiences in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) have produced
various explanations for persistent gender disparities
[@benbow_gender_2016].
One explanation is that women in first year computer science courses rate
themselves as being less experienced, prepared, or able to master the course
material than the men [@fisher_undergraduate_1997].
Additionally, women often experience stereotype threats that
influence their math and science performance as well as their career goals [@hill_why_2010].
The majority of our organization's founding graduate students (all women) began

> coding in our undergraduate careers or later.

Reviewer 10: ```suggestion
coding in their undergraduate careers or later.
```

the club is run in person rather than virtually), and are thus largely high school
women from the Ann Arbor area.
In 2019 we launched our own summer program, the Data Science Summer Experience.
When held in person, the Summer Experience
is hosted in Detroit to provide the opportunity
for high school women outside of Ann Arbor to learn coding skills in an inclusive environment.

The national Girls Who Code organization provides a curriculum that teaches
website and application development through programming languages like HTML and
Java; however, our biomedical science graduate students generally have limited
experience with these languages and with web development.
In contrast, many of us have extensive experience performing data science
using the Python programming language.
Data Scientist was rated the #1 job in America by Glassdoor in 2016-2019, #3 in
2020, and #2 in 2021 [@stansell_breaking_2019].
Furthermore, Python is the most popular programming language according to the PYPL
PopularitY of Programming Language Index [@noauthor_pypl_nodate].
Therefore, we believe career exploration in data science using the Python programming

> language will optimally prepare our students for careers that provide financial stability.

Author: ```suggestion
language will optimally prepare our students for careers that provide financial stability and upward economic mobility.
```

We chose the content based on what our students would need to learn
to complete a small data analysis project and communicate their findings
to their peers.
We divided the content by topic into Jupyter notebooks for each lesson, with
each lesson taking approximately 15-20 minutes to teach via live coding.
Every lesson has a corresponding practice notebook with additional exercises on
the same content taught in the lesson, but using different data or variables.
We hosted the curriculum notebooks in a public GitHub repository to facilitate
collaborative development and peer review using pull requests.
In the initial curriculum drafting phase, developers were assigned lesson and
practice notebooks to write.
Once the draft of a lesson was completed, the writer opened a pull request and
asked for review from a different developer.
The reviewer then provided feedback and approved the pull request to be merged
into the main branch after the writer made any requested changes.
This way, more than one person viewed each notebook before it could be
incorporated into the public curriculum, which reduced mistakes and ensured

> higher quality content. <!-- TODO: cite U-M Carpentries paper for the development model once it's submitted to bioRxiv?-->

Author: @kelly-sovacool are we submitting the curriculum manuscript to bioRxiv? I don't think it hurts to try.

I think we can also update this post-submission if needed.

> higher quality content. <!-- TODO: cite U-M Carpentries paper for the development model once it's submitted to bioRxiv?-->

Reviewer 2: @zenalapp submitted, waiting for screening!

> higher quality content. <!-- TODO: cite U-M Carpentries paper for the development model once it's submitted to bioRxiv?-->

Author: yay, thanks @kelly-sovacool!!

In preparation for the 2020 Summer Experience, we switched to a flipped
classroom style following feedback from our club participants that it was too
difficult to follow along live coding via Zoom.
We recorded facilitators teaching the lesson notebooks as if they were live
coding, then shared them along with a link to the lesson notebooks for students
to code along with while watching the videos.
Each video shows the Jupyter notebook alongside the facilitator themselves
teaching.
This format allowed students to learn at their own pace, then ask questions and
practice when we met together virtually. <!-- TODO: should this actually go later in the curriculum section?-->

Our Jupyter notebooks and links to the lesson videos can be accessed on GitHub:
https://github.com/GWC-DCMB/curriculum-notebooks

# Curriculum

Our curriculum was designed for high school students with no prior coding
experience who are interested in learning Python programming for data science.
However, this course material would be useful for anyone interested in
teaching or learning basic programming for data analysis.

Our curriculum features short lessons to deliver course material in “bite sized”

> chunks, followed by practices to solidify the learners' understanding.

Author: ```suggestion
chunks, followed by practices to solidify the learners' understanding.
Pre-recorded videos of lessons enable effective virtual learning and flipped classroom approaches.
```

## Learning Objectives

Our learning objectives are:

1. Understand fundamental concepts and best practices in coding.
2. Apply data analysis to real world data to answer scientific questions.
3. Create informative summary statistics and data visualizations in Python.

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and

> participation in our events exposes students to the many ways coding and

Author: Possibly change "events" to something else? e.g. "programming", but that might be confusing since we are also talking about coding.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
participation in our program exposes students to the many ways coding and
```

Reviewer 7: yes this works!

data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

Our curriculum design consists of 27 lessons broken up into 5 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including
pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and
matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;
@hunter_matplotlib_2007].
Each lesson consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson.

![Our lesson modules.](lesson-modules.png)

Each lesson builds on those before it, beginning with relevant content reminders
from the previous lessons and ending with a concise summary of the skills
presented within.
As they progress through the curriculum, the students begin simultaneously

> working on a data science project using a real world

Author: I added a few examples of projects in Experience of Use (lines 358-59). Not sure it's worth including actual data from a student project, but I don't think it hurts to try submitting to biorxiv, especially if you include some of the numbers you calculated for the nature app.

1. Group projects were performed using paired programming to allow learners to
collaborate and learn from each other.
1. We used the "sticky note" system from The Carpentries by which learners can
ask for help by putting up a colored sticky note (or a Zoom emoji in the case of
virtual meetings) [@becker_responding_2016].
1. We exposed the learners to different aspects of data science by bringing in
women guest speakers from academics and industry. This allowed them to better
put what they were learning into context, think about how they might use the
skills they were learning in potential future careers, and exposed them to
successful women in STEM.

### Learner experiences

We surveyed learners anonymously after each Club and Summer Experience and found
that they all felt their skills in Python programming,
problem solving, critical thinking, and collaboration had improved.
Furthermore, for the 2019 instance of Club we asked that all participants take a
pre-test and a post-test comprising Python coding questions.
While only five participants recorded their post-test, all of them answered more
questions correctly on the post-test than the pre-test (range 1-8 more questions

> correct out of 11).

Author: Yeah that'd be great!

> correct out of 11).

Reviewer: On a 10 question skills assessment, the average increase in correct answers between the first 2019 club meeting and the last 2020 club meeting was 4.2 with a standard deviation of 2.8 (N=5 respondents). Fifty-two percent of the 2019 Detroit Summer Experience in Data Science learners (N=19) did not have experience with Python programming. Afterwards, on a 5 point scale from 'Not at all' to 'Definitely',' the average answer for  ‘Do you feel like you’ve improved your Python programming skills?’ was 4.6 (standard deviation [s.d.]=1), with 4.2 (s.d.=0.9) for ‘Do you feel like you’ve improved your problem solving and critical thinking skills,’ and 4.0 (s.d.=0.9) for ‘Do you feel like this experience helped you gain self-confidence?' In a survey of Club and Summer Experience alumni, 75% (N=20) want to pursue a STEM career. 62% (N=21) are still coding. On a 5-point scale from strongly 'Disagree' to 'Strongly Agree,' the average answer for ‘My participation in GWC impacted my career aspirations’ is 4 (s.d.=0.9), with 4.5 (s.d.=0.6) for ‘Participating in GWC made me feel more confident in analyzing data’ and 3.9 (s.d.=1) for ‘Participating in GWC made me more confident in myself.’

In fact, about a third of participants claim that they are now more interested in
pursuing a career in computer or data science compared to before their Girls Who
Code experience.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge our faculty co-sponsors Maureen Sartor &
Cristina Mitrea.
We appreciate the continued support of U-M DCMB staff and faculty including
Julia Eussen, Mary Freer, Linda Peasley, Jane Wiesner, Brian Athey, and
Margit Burmeister.
We are grateful for the resources provided by the national Girls Who Code
organization.

Our programming is made possible by the dedication of past and present Executive
Committee members, Club and Summer Experience Facilitators, and Capstone Project
mentors including
Shweta Ramdas, Alex Weber, Arushi Varshney, Sophie Hoffman, Hojae Lee, Ruma
Deb, Saige Rutherford, Michelle McNulty, Bailey Peck, Chloe Whicker, Carolina
Rojas Ramirez, Verity Sturm, Zoe Drasner, Sarah Latto, Emily Roberts, Angel Chu,
Vivek Rai, Hillary Miller, Ashton Baker, Murchtricia Jones, Lauren Jepsen,
Aubrey Annis, Awanti Sambarey, Mengtong Hu, Maribel Okiye, Yingxiao Zhang, and
Neslihan Bisgin.

> We are grateful for the funding and other support provided to our

Author: Already below (line 436)

The majority of our organization's founding graduate students (all women) began
coding in our undergraduate careers or later.
We wanted to provide a safe place for local high school women to
develop confidence in themselves and their computational skills
before college, and be exposed to successful women role models in STEM to counter negative
stereotypes.

Girls Who Code, a national organization whose mission
is to close the gender gap in technology
[@saujani_girls_2015], was founded in 2012.
Because of our personal experiences and the paucity of women in our field, we
began a Girls Who Code student organization at the University of Michigan in 2017.
For the past four academic years we have registered annually as a recognized
Girls Who Code Club because the national organization provides name recognition,
curriculum resources, guidance for a Capstone Impact Project, and a framework
for launching a coding club.
Participants in the Club attend weekly meetings at the University of Michigan (when
the club is run in person rather than virtually), and are thus largely high school
women from the Ann Arbor area.

> In 2019 we launched a Data Science Summer Experience that is unaffiliated with
> the national Girls Who Code organization. When held in person, the Summer Experience

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In 2019 we launched a Data Science Summer Experience program (not officially registered with
the national Girls Who Code organization). When held in person, the Summer Experience
```
Tweaking the wording since we still use GWC logos, maybe we don't even need the part in parentheses.

Reviewer 2: Alternative idea below, what do you think?
@bnwolford @hayse1 
```suggestion
In 2019 we launched our own summer program, the Data Science Summer Experience. 
When held in person, the Summer Experience
```

This way, more than one person viewed each notebook before it could be
incorporated into the public curriculum, which reduced mistakes and ensured
higher quality content. <!-- TODO: cite U-M Carpentries paper for the development model once it's submitted to bioRxiv?-->
While teaching from the curriculum at the first Data Science Summer Experience,
instructors took notes on their experience and made revisions afterward.
Maintainers continue to monitor the repository and resolve issues as they arise.

Following the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic, we quickly pivoted our club to a
virtual format.
In preparation for the 2020 Summer Experience, we switched to a flipped
classroom style following feedback from our club participants that it was too
difficult to follow along live coding via Zoom.
We recorded facilitators teaching the lesson notebooks as if they were live
coding, then shared them along with a link to the lesson notebooks for students
to code along with while watching the videos.
Each video shows the Jupyter notebook alongside the facilitator themselves
teaching.
This format allowed students to learn at their own pace, then ask questions and

> practice when we met together virtually. <!-- TODO: should this actually go later in the curriculum section?-->

Author: ```suggestion
practice when we met together virtually. 
```

2. Apply data analysis to real world data to answer scientific questions.
3. Create informative summary statistics and data visualizations in Python.

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and
participation in our events exposes students to the many ways coding and
data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

Our curriculum design consists of 27 lessons broken up into 5 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including
pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and
matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;
@hunter_matplotlib_2007].
Each lesson consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson.

![Our lesson modules.](lesson-modules.png)

Each lesson builds on those before it, beginning with relevant content reminders
from the previous lessons and ending with a concise summary of the skills
presented within.

> As they progress through the curriculum, the students begin simultaneously
> working on a data science project on a topic of their choice using a real world
> dataset.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
As they progress through the curriculum, the students begin simultaneously
working on a data science project using a real world
dataset of their choosing.
```

ask for help by putting up a colored sticky note (or a Zoom emoji in the case of
virtual meetings) [@becker_responding_2016].
1. We exposed the learners to different aspects of data science by bringing in
women guest speakers from academics and industry. This allowed them to better
put what they were learning into context, think about how they might use the
skills they were learning in potential future careers, and exposed them to
successful women in STEM.

### Learner experiences

We surveyed learners anonymously after each Club and Summer Experience and found
that they all felt their skills in Python programming,
problem solving, critical thinking, and collaboration had improved.
Furthermore, for the 2019 instance of Club we asked that all participants take a
pre-test and a post-test comprising Python coding questions.
While only five participants recorded their post-test, all of them answered more
questions correctly on the post-test than the pre-test (range 1-8 more questions
correct out of 11).

Overwhelmingly, learners' favorite parts of the program are the guest speakers
and the project.
These aspects of our curriculum expose them to new fields and allow them to

> apply their newfound coding skills to asking an interesting question.

Reviewer: A 2021 Club learner shared, "I plan to go to college for Computer Science and get a robotics minor when my college offers it. GWC has inspired me to consider pursuing a Masters or PhD in CS as well as take some electives in Data Science.” Five of our 86 alumni have gone on to perform research with U-M faculty members, with one presenting her work at an international conference.

mentors including
Shweta Ramdas, Alex Weber, Arushi Varshney, Sophie Hoffman, Hojae Lee, Ruma
Deb, Saige Rutherford, Michelle McNulty, Bailey Peck, Chloe Whicker, Carolina
Rojas Ramirez, Verity Sturm, Zoe Drasner, Sarah Latto, Emily Roberts, Angel Chu,
Vivek Rai, Hillary Miller, Ashton Baker, Murchtricia Jones, Lauren Jepsen,
Aubrey Annis, Awanti Sambarey, Mengtong Hu, Maribel Okiye, Yingxiao Zhang, and
Neslihan Bisgin.

We are grateful for the funding and other support provided to our
student organization from the following sponsors:
the U-M Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics,
the U-M Department of Biostatistics,
the U-M Department of Statistics,
the U-M Office of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies,
the U-M Endowment in Basic Sciences,
the U-M Detroit Center,
the U-M Life Sciences Institute,
the U-M Office of Research,
the Michigan Council of Women in Technology Foundation,
DELL Technologies,
Cisco Systems,
Zingerman’s Delicatessen,
the Girls Who Code Support Fund,
and anonymous donations from Giving Blue Day 2019.

We also thank the students who have participated in our Club and Summer
Experience events.

# Funding

> MD, ZL, and BNW received support from the National Science Foundation Graduate

Author: ```suggestion
MD, ACD, ZL, and BNW received support from the National Science Foundation Graduate
```

apply their newfound coding skills to asking an interesting question.
About a third of participants claim that they are now more interested in
pursuing a career in computer or data science compared to before their Girls Who
Code experience.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to acknowledge our faculty co-sponsors Maureen Sartor &
Cristina Mitrea.
We appreciate the continued support of U-M DCMB staff and faculty including
Julia Eussen, Mary Freer, Linda Peasley, Jane Wiesner, Brian Athey, and
Margit Burmeister.
We are grateful for the resources provided by the national Girls Who Code
organization.

Our programming is made possible by the dedication of past and present Executive
Committee members, Club and Summer Experience Facilitators, and Capstone Project
mentors including Alex Weber, Arushi Varshney, Sophie Hoffman, Hojae Lee, Ruma
Deb, Saige Rutherford, Michelle McNulty, Bailey Peck, Chloe Whicker, Carolina
Rojas Ramirez, Verity Sturm, Zoe Drasner, Sarah Latto, Emily Roberts, Angel Chu,
Vivek Rai, Hillary Miller, Ashton Baker, Murchtricia Jones, Lauren Jepsen,
Aubrey Annis, Awanti Sambarey, Mengtong Hu, Maribel Okiye, Yingxiao Zhang, and
Neslihan Bisgin.

> Our student organization has received funding from the U-M Department of
> Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, the U-M Office of Graduate and
> Postdoctoral Studies, anonymous donations from Giving Blue Day 2019, the U-M
> Endowment in Basic Sciences, and the Girls Who Code Support Fund.
> The 2019 Summer Experience was sponsored by Zingerman’s Delicatessen, the U-M
> Statistics Department, the U-M Detroit Center, Dell, Cisco, the U-M Department
> of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, and the U-M Biostatistics
> Department.

Reviewer 2: Can we make this section more concise?

Also, according to our records, we received funding from U-M ARC and LSI for SE 2019, so I added them in this suggestion.

```suggestion
Our student organization has received funding and other support from 
the U-M Department of Computational Medicine and Bioinformatics, 
the U-M Biostatistics Department, 
the U-M Statistics Department, 
the U-M Office of Graduate and Postdoctoral Studies, 
the U-M Endowment in Basic Sciences, 
the U-M Detroit Center, 
the U-M Life Sciences Institute,
the U-M Advanced Research Computing
anonymous donations from Giving Blue Day 2019,
Zingerman’s Delicatessen, 
Dell, 
Cisco, 
and the Girls Who Code Support Fund.
```

During the 1974-1975 academic year, women achieved 18.9% of total Bachelor's
degrees in computer and information sciences in the US [@nces_digest_2012].
By 1983-1984 this peaked at 37.1%, but fell to 17.6% by 2010-2011. We also see this
national trend in the training of the next generation of Bioinformaticians at
Michigan Medicine.
Since accepting its first students in 2001, the U-M Bioinformatics Graduate
Program has graduated 66 male and 22 female doctorates as of 2019.
This disparity begins at the applicant level; during 2016-2019 the average
percentage of females applying directly to the Bioinformatics PhD program was
35.2%, and the average percentage of female applicants listing Bioinformatics as first or second
choice in the Program in Biomedical Sciences, U-M's biomedical PhD umbrella
program was 41%.

Previous research on women's educational experiences in science, technology, engineering,
and mathematics (STEM) have produced
various explanations for persistent gender disparities
[@benbow_gender_2016].
One explanation is that women in first year computer science courses rate
themselves as being less experienced, prepared, or able to master the course

> material than the men [@fisher_undergraduate_1997].

Author: I think we should make clearer why this is an explanation. e.g. does this perception directly lead to poorer performance? Alternatively, we could delete this sentence and just include the next one as the example. @bnwolford thoughts?

Reviewer 2: I deleted it, IMO less is often more 605d8a6

Additionally, women often experience stereotype threats that
influence their math and science performance as well as their career goals [@hill_why_2010].
The majority of our organization's founding graduate students (all women) began
coding in our undergraduate careers or later.
We wanted to provide a safe place for local high school women to
develop confidence in themselves and their computational skills
before college, and be exposed to successful women role models in STEM to counter negative
stereotypes.

Girls Who Code, a national organization whose mission
is to close the gender gap in technology
[@saujani_girls_2015], was founded in 2012.

> Because of our personal experiences and the paucity of women in our field, we

Author: Do you think we should cite this?

Reviewer 2: Do you mean add a citation for "the paucity of women in our field"?

Author: Yes

Author: @bnwolford do you have a good reference for this?

Author: Could reference this: @nces_digest_2012 (we reference it in relation to computer and information science earlier)

```suggestion
Because of our personal experiences and the paucity of women in our field [@nces_digest_2012], we
```

## Learning Objectives

Our learning objectives are:

1. Understand fundamental concepts and best practices in coding.
2. Apply data analysis to real world data to answer scientific questions.
3. Create informative summary statistics and data visualizations in Python.

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and
participation in our events exposes students to the many ways coding and
data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

![Our lesson modules.](lesson-modules.png)

Our curriculum design consists of 27 lessons broken up into 5 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including
pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and
matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;
@hunter_matplotlib_2007].
Each of the following modules consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson:

> 

Author: Thoughts on just referencing the figure here and removing the list?

Reviewer 2: @zenalapp I agree with that plan

Our Jupyter notebooks and links to the lesson videos can be accessed on GitHub:
https://github.com/GWC-DCMB/curriculum-notebooks

# Curriculum

Our curriculum was designed for high school students with no prior coding
experience who are interested in learning Python programming for data science.
However, this course material would be useful for anyone interested in 
teaching or learning basic programming for data analysis.

Our curriculum features short lessons to deliver course material in “bite sized”
chunks, followed by practices to solidify the learners' understanding.

## Learning Objectives

Our learning objectives are:

1. Understand fundamental concepts and best practices in coding.
2. Apply data analysis to real world data to answer scientific questions.
3. Create informative summary statistics and data visualizations in Python.

These skills provide a solid foundation for basic data analysis in Python and
participation in our events exposes students to the many ways coding and
data science can be used to make large impacts across many disciplines.

## Course Content

> ![Our lesson modules.](lesson-modules.png)
> 
> Our curriculum design consists of 27 lessons broken up into 5 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
> Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including
> pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and
> matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;
> @hunter_matplotlib_2007].
> Each of the following modules consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
> the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
> exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson:
> 
> Jupyter Notebook Setup:
> 
> 1. Jupyter Setup
> 
> Coding Fundamentals:
> 
> 2. HelloWorld and Variables
> 3. Variables and Types
> 4. Lists Intro
> 5. Indexing
> 6. 2D Lists Intro (legacy lesson)
> 7. 2D Lists Indexing (legacy lesson)
> 8. Logic
> 9. Conditionals
> 10. Loops I
> 11. Loops II
> 12. Using Functions and Methods
> 
> Data Science Essentials:
> 
> 13. Packages
> 14. Pandas Intro
> 15. Pandas Reading
> 16. Pandas Subsetting I
> 17. Pandas Subsetting II
> 18. Dictionaries
> 19. Writing Functions
> 20. Numpy Intro
> 
> Basic Statistical Analysis:
> 
> 21. Averages
> 22. Percents
> 23. Correlations
> 24. Significance
> 
> Data Visualization:
> 
> 25. Line Graphs
> 26. Scatterplots
> 27. Bar Charts and Histograms
> 

Reviewer 2: Implementation of @zenalapp's suggestion:

```suggestion

Our curriculum design consists of 27 lessons broken up into 5 modules that cover Jupyter notebook setup,
Python coding fundamentals, use of essential data science packages including
pandas and numpy, basic statistical analyses, and plotting using seaborn and
matplotlib (Figure 1) [@harris_array_2020; @waskom_seaborn_2021;
@hunter_matplotlib_2007].
Each module consists of a lesson notebook, used for teaching
the concept via live coding, and a practice notebook containing similar
exercises for the student to complete on their own following the lesson.

![Our lesson modules.](lesson-modules.png)

```
